86
!!!HAO:    Mr. Murie said that the story concerning the following song was recently
!!!HAO: told him by John Luwak: A man and his wife had one child, a daughter, who
!!!HAO: had many admirers.  Sirirut Kawi (Pushed Forward) entered the lodge
!!!HAO: early one morning, after the manner of young men courting a maiden.
!!!HAO: The man said to his wife, "Did you notice that young man?"
!!!HAO: He came again, and then the woman said to her husband.  "The young man
!!!HAO: is handsome, he comes of a good family, he has plenty of horses and
!!!HAO: his arms are strong so that he would be good to support us."  When he
!!!HAO: came the third time they told him to wait for his answer until the girl's
!!!HAO: relatives could discuss the matter.  So they called their relatives
!!!HAO: together, the mother's relatives being seated on the south and the
!!!HAO: father's on the north side of the lodge.  The father's relatives left
!!!HAO: the decision to the mother's relatives, who decided that the girl should
!!!HAO: be allowed to marry the young man.  Many presents were distributed.
!!!HAO: The young man's relatives gave presents, and the young man gave a fine
!!!HAO: horse to the father and mother of the girl.  The next day the old man
!!!HAO: gave the horse to his wife.  There were buffalo robes and many valuable
!!!HAO: articles among the presents.
!!!HAO: All went well for a time, and then the young man began to beat his wife
!!!HAO: and abuse her.  The girl's mother begged her father to interfere, but
!!!HAO: he refused to do so.  She said, "You claim to be a brave man; why do
!!!HAO: you not make our son-in-law stop beating his wife?"
!!!HAO: He said, "Do you remember one beautiful morning when you said the
!!!HAO: young man was handsome, that he came of good family, had many horses,
!!!HAO: and his arms were strong?"
!!!HAO: "Yes."
!!!HAO: "Do you remember that my relatives sat on the north and yours on the
!!!HAO: south side of the lodge, and that my relatives left the decision to
!!!HAO: yours?"
!!!HAO: "Yes."
!!!HAO: "So your people sold our daughter to that man.  We have no right to
!!!HAO: interfere with his property.  He gave the ponies.  He gave a fine pony
!!!HAO: to us.  Didn't I give you that pony?"
!!!HAO: "Yes."
!!!HAO: "Get a kettle.  Put it on the fire and put water in it."  She did so.
!!!HAO: "Now take your parfleche bag and put the finest of your dried meat in
!!!HAO: the pot.  When the soup is done you must bring me some in a wooden bowl."
!!!HAO: When she brought the soup he told her to sit beside him and eat.  As
!!!HAO: they ate he said, "What nice fat!  What fine meat this is!  Who got it
!!!HAO: for you?"
!!!HAO: "Our son-in-law."
!!!HAO: "You like the meat that our son-in-law brings us?  He punishes our
!!!HAO: daughter for her own good.  He does not want her to run around the camp
!!!HAO: foolishly.  He wants her to be a good cook and to look after things in
!!!HAO: the lodge."
!!!HAO: Then the woman stopped finding fault with her son-in-law.
!!!HAO: The young man was well liked by the chiefs.  They asked him to join their
!!!HAO: societies and later he became a chief.  He and his wife had one child,
!!!HAO: a body.  This little boy liked to stay with his grandfather, who told
!!!HAO: him stories.  His grandfather was Saritsaris (Mad Chief), a brave man of
!!!HAO: the Chaui Band.  The little boy cooled his grandfather's mush or soup by
!!!HAO: swinging the dish back and forth, then he set it before the old man.
!!!HAO: When the little boy was about half-grown he heard that a war party was
!!!HAO: to start.  He told his mother that he wanted to go, and he wanted her
!!!HAO: and his grandmother to make him some moccasins.  He also wanted arrows,
!!!HAO: a bow and a quiver, and all the equipment of a warrior.  When the old
!!!HAO: man heard this he called the boy and said, "Do you realize what you are
!!!HAO: doing?"
!!!HAO: "Yes, I am grown to be a man."
!!!HAO: "Do you have dreams at night?"
!!!HAO: "Yes."
!!!HAO: "Can you relate some of them?"
!!!HAO: "Yes."
!!!HAO: "Tell one to me."
!!!HAO: "In my dream I was with a war party.  I found myself coming toward home
!!!HAO: through deep snow."
!!!HAO: "That is enough," said the old man.  "You can go."
!!!HAO: The women had sent the boy to his grandfather, thinking he would keep
!!!HAO: him at home, and they were greatly surprised to learn that the grandfather
!!!HAO: had told the boy to go with the warriors.  It was fall when the war party
!!!HAO: started.  As winter was coming near it was noised through the camp that
!!!HAO: all the war party had been killed and the people began to mourn.  The
!!!HAO: women of this family mourned exceedingly and cut their flesh with knives,
!!!HAO: but the old man sat and laughed at them, or smoked his pipe.  This went
!!!HAO: on for about 10 days.  Then his wife said, "You did not care for our
!!!HAO: grandchild," and his daughter said, "Why do you not mourn?"  The old man
!!!HAO: said to his wife, "You remember that you turned the boy over to me when
!!!HAO: he wanted to go to war.  You made moccasins for him and filled his
!!!HAO: quiver with arrows.  I questioned him and found that he had a dream in
!!!HAO: which he was returning alone through deep snow.  That dream will come
!!!HAO: true.  He is coming home, so I want you all to stop mourning."
!!!HAO: They would not believe him, but one day, after a snow, some people
!!!HAO: going out from the village met the young man returning.  He said, "All
!!!HAO: the warriors were killed except myself."
!!!HAO: The man rode back and cried through the village, "Saritsaris' grandchild
!!!HAO: is coming through the deep snow."
!!!HAO: Everyone in the lodge was excited, except the old man.  He did not rush
!!!HAO: out to meet his grandson.  The women urged him to go, but he said, "He
!!!HAO: is coming; never mind."
!!!HAO: When the young man entered the lodge his grandfather said, "Sit on my
!!!HAO: knees."  The old man passed his hands downward over the young man's
!!!HAO: head and body in the tribal manner of "blessing," and said, "I believed
!!!HAO: in your dream and now you are here."
!!!HAO: Then he told him to sit yonder and said, "I ask you -- when attacked,
!!!HAO: did you hide in a ravine?  When you were a little boy and cooled my
!!!HAO: mush I told you that I never wanted to hear that your body was found
!!!HAO: in a ravine.  I said that if you must be killed, let it be on a hilltop,
!!!HAO: fighting in the open.  I told you not to run away.  Did you fight the
!!!HAO: enemy?  Is it possible that you had gone on an errand and on your
!!!HAO: return found the fight going on and ran home instead of joining your
!!!HAO: comrades?  I told you always to tell the truth.  Don't lie to me now.
!!!HAO: Tell me the truth."
!!!HAO: The young man said, "This will tell the story," and he exposed his arm,
!!!HAO: which was raw and sore from wrist to elbow, where the bowstring had
!!!HAO: stung him.  The boy said, "I did not even throw away my buffalo robe.
!!!HAO: I fought until night and then they let me alone."
!!!HAO: The old man said, "Now your name shall be Sirirut Kawi, the same as
!!!HAO: your father's.  If you had been killed I would not have shed a tear,
!!!HAO: for I urged you to go on the warpath."
!!!HAO: So the young man lived with his grandfather until the next summer,
!!!HAO: when the village was attacked by the enemy.  The young man went out
!!!HAO: and was killed.  The news was brought into the village and the old man
!!!HAO: heard it.  He took his robe of bear skin, threw it over his shoulder,
!!!HAO: and went about the camp telling how kind the young man was to the old
!!!HAO: and sick.  Returning home, he said, "You waved the bowl of mush to cool
!!!HAO: it.  I shall miss you."
!!!HAO: People said his heart was like stone until he sang this song.  Then he
!!!HAO: wept.  In the first portion of the words he sings about himself and
!!!HAO: his pride in his grandson, and in the latter portion he sings about the
!!!HAO: young man.
!!!HTX: Mad Chief sings as he walks, his spirit is glad as he walks.
!!!HTX: Pushed Forward is no longer among us, yet we seem to see him;
!!!HTX: Yonder he comes.
